Achilles Tendon Problems
Introduction
Physiotherapy in Banff for Achilles Pain
Welcome to Active Motion Physiotherapy's patient resource about Achilles Tendon Problems.
Problems that affect the Achilles tendon include tendonitis, tendinopathy, tendocalcaneal bursitis, and
tendonosis. Each of these conditions will be described and explained. These problems affect athletes most
often, especially runners, basketball players, and anyone engaged in jumping sports. They are also common
among both active and sedentary (inactive) middle-aged adults. These problems cause pain at the back of
the calf. Severe cases may result in a rupture of the Achilles tendon.
This guide will help you understand:
where the Achilles tendon is located
• 
what kinds of Achilles tendon problems there are
• 
how an injured Achilles tendon causes problems
• 
what treatment options are available
• 
Physiotherapy in Banff for Achilles Pain
1

Anatomy
Where is the Achilles tendon, and what does it do?
The Achilles tendon is a strong, fibrous band that connects the calf muscle to the heel. The calf is actually
formed by two muscles, the underlying soleus and the thick outer gastrocnemius. Together, they form the
gastroc-soleus muscle group.
Gastroc-Soleus Muscle Group
Anatomy
2

When they contract, they pull on the Achilles tendon, causing your foot to point down and helping you rise
on your toes. This powerful muscle group helps when you sprint, jump, or climb. Several different problems
can occur that affect the Achilles tendon, some rather minor and some quite severe.
Powerful Muscle Group
Tendocalcaneal Bursitis
A bursa is a fluid-filled sac designed to limit friction between rubbing parts. These sacs, or bursae, are
found in many places in the body. When a bursa becomes inflamed, the condition is called bursitis.
Tendocalcaneal Bursitis is an inflammation in the bursa behind the heel bone. This bursa normally limits
friction where the thick fibrous Achilles tendon that runs down the back of the calf glides up and down
behind the heel.
Gastroc-Soleus Muscle Group
3

Achilles Tendonitis
A violent strain can cause trauma to the calf muscles or the Achilles tendon. Sometimes this is referred to as
tendonitis. This injury can happen during a strong contraction of the muscle, as when running or sprinting.
Tendocalcaneal Bursitis
4

Landing on the ground after a jump can force the foot upward, also causing injury. The strain can affect
different portions of the muscles or tendon. For instance, the strain may
occur in the center of the muscle. Or it may happen where the
muscles join the Achilles tendon (called the musculotendinous junction).
Achilles Tendinopathy/Tendonosis
Chronic overuse may contribute to changes in the Achilles tendon as well, leading to degeneration and
thickening of the tendon. Studies show there is no sign of inflammation with overuse injuries of tendons.
Most experts now refer to this condition as tendinopathy or tendonosis instead of tendonitis.
Achilles Tendon Rupture
In severe cases, the force of a violent strain may even rupture the tendon. The classic example is a
middle-aged tennis player or weekend warrior who places too much stress on the tendon and experiences a
tearing of the tendon. In some instances, the rupture may be preceded by a period of tendonitis, which
renders the tendon weaker than normal.
Achilles Tendonitis
5

Related Document: client_company*'s Patient's Guide to Foot Anatomy
Causes
How do these problems develop?
It’s not entirely clear why these problems develop in some people but not in others. Changes in the normal
alignment of the foot and leg may be part of the problem. Anyone with one leg shorter than the other is at
increased risk of Achilles tendon problems.
For the athlete, sudden increases in training
may be a key factor. Runners may add on miles or engage in excessive hill training while other athletes
increase training intensity. Other risk factors include obesity, diabetes (or other endocrine disorders), aging,
exposure to steroids, and taking fluoroquinolones (antibiotics).
Problems with the Achilles tendon seem to occur in different ways. Initially, irritation of the outer covering
of the tendon, called the paratenon, causes paratendonitis. Paratendonitis is simply inflammation around the
tendon. Inflammation of the tendocalcaneal bursa (described above) may also be present with
paratendonitis. Either of these conditions may be due to repeated overuse or ill-fitting shoes that rub on the
tendon or bursa.
As we age, our tendons can degenerate. Degeneration means that wear and tear occurs in the tendon over
time and leads to a situation where the tendon is weaker than normal. Degeneration in a tendon usually
shows up as a loss of the normal arrangement of the fibers of the tendon. Tendons are made up of strands of
a material called collagen. (Think of a tendon as similar to a nylon rope and the strands of collagen as the
nylon strands.)
Causes
6

Some of the individual strands of the
tendon become jumbled due to the degeneration, other fibers break, and the tendon loses strength.
The healing process in the tendon causes the tendon to become thickened as scar tissue tries to repair the
tendon. This process can continue to the extent that a nodule forms within the tendon. This degenerative
condition without inflammation is called tendonosis. The area of tendonosis in the tendon is weaker than
normal tendon. Tiny tears in the tissue around the tendon occur with overuse. The weakened, degenerative
tendon sets the stage for the possibility of actual rupture of the Achilles tendon.
Symptoms
What do these conditions feel like?
Symptoms
7

Tendocalcaneal bursitis usually begins with pain and irritation at the back of the heel. There may be visible
redness and swelling in the area. The back of the shoe may further irritate the condition, making it difficult
to tolerate shoe wear.
Achilles tendonitis usually occurs further up the leg, just above the heel bone itself. The Achilles tendon in
this area may be noticeably thickened and tender to the touch. Pain is present with walking, especially when
pushing off on the toes.
An Achilles tendon rupture is usually an unmistakable event. Some bystanders may report actually hearing
the snap, and the victim of a rupture usually describes a sensation similar to being violently kicked in the
calf. Following rupture the calf may swell, and the injured person usually can't rise on his toes.
Diagnosis
How do health care providers identify the problem?
Diagnosis of Achilles tendon problems is almost always made through clinical history and physical
examination. The physical examination is used to determine specifically where your leg hurts.
When you visit Active Motion Physiotherapy, our physiotherapist may perform some simple tests if a
rupture is suspected. Your therapist may move your ankle in different positions and ask you to hold your
foot against applied pressure.  Palpation (feeling for any abnormalities in the tendon) and muscle function
tests may also be included. By stretching the calf muscles and feeling where these muscles attach onto the
Achilles tendon, we can begin to locate the problem area.
Some patients may be referred to a doctor for further diagnosis. Once your diagnostic examination is
complete, the physiotherapists at Active Motion Physiotherapy have treatment options that will help speed
your recovery, so that you can more quickly return to your active lifestyle.
Our Treatment
Non-surgical Rehabilitation
When you begin physiotherapy at Active Motion Physiotherapy, the rehabilitation program that our
physiotherapist prescribes will depend on the specific type of problem (tendonitis or
tendinopathy/tendonosis/tendon rupture) present.
Tendonitis/Tendinopathy
In the past, nonsurgical treatment for tendocalcaneal bursitis and Achilles tendonitis started with a
combination of rest, ice, and anti-inflammatory medications prescribed by your doctor.
Since it is now recognized that many tendon problems occur without inflammation, the use of
anti-inflammatories and ice have come into question. In the case of true inflammation, the overuse of these
modalities may prevent a normal, healing inflammatory process. Preventing inflammation needed to clean
up cellular debris in the injured area may lead to delayed or incomplete healing. The result may be future
chronic problems of tendonosis and/or tendinopathy.
Many experts suggest that when there is any doubt about inflammation, treatment should proceed as if there
are no inflammatory cells present. Our approach would then focus on pain relief and restoring proper
Diagnosis
8

motion and weight-bearing so you can return to your usual activities.
If there is an inflammatory process, then the condition should respond fairly quickly to drug and
antiinflammatory interventions. Limiting, but not eliminating, inflammation is the new goal.
Our physiotherapists know when and how to apply cold modalities to reduce swelling and pain, while still
allowing the healing inflammatory process. We may also apply treatments such as ultrasound, moist heat,
and massage are used to control pain and inflammation. As pain eases, we will progresses your treatment to
include stretching and strengthening exercises.
Tendonosis
If the problem is one of tendon tissue degeneration, healing and recovery may take longer. This type of
injury will not respond to treatment designed to reduce inflammation. Correct treatment of tendonosis
involves fostering new collagen tissue growth and improving the strength of the tendon. Rehabilitation
following rupture of the tendon is quite different and is described later.
An acute injury needs rest. We recommend that initially, you limit activities that require walking on the sore
leg. Although the time required for rehabilitation varies among patients, in cases of Achilles tendinopathy,
or when a partial tendon tear is being treated without surgery, patients may require two to three months of
physiotherapy.
Your physiotherapist may recommend that a small (one-quarter inch) heel lift be placed in your shoe to
minimize stress by putting slack in the calf muscle and Achilles tendon. A similar sized lift will also be
placed in the other shoe to keep everything aligned.
Injured tendons shorten and need to be stretched. Only gentle stretches of the calf muscles and Achilles
tendon are used at first. As the tendon heals and pain eases, more aggressive stretches are given. Our
therapist may also use ultrasound and massage to help the tendon heal.
As your condition improves, exercises to strengthen the calf muscles begin. Strengthening starts gradually
using isometrics, exercises that work the muscles but protect the healing area. Eventually, specialized
strengthening exercises, called eccentrics, are used, working the calf muscle while it lengthens.
The physiotherapy provided by Active Motion Physiotherapy enables patients to gradually return to normal
activities. We have specialized programs to guide athletes in rehabilitation that is specific to their type of
sport.
Tendon Rupture
Nonsurgical treatment for an Achilles tendon rupture is somewhat controversial. It is clear that treatment
with a cast will allow the vast majority of tendon ruptures to heal, but the incidence of rerupture is increased
in those patients treated with casting for eight weeks when compared with those undergoing surgery. In
addition, the strength of the healed tendon is significantly less in patients who choose cast treatment. For
these reasons, many orthopedists feel that Achilles tendon ruptures in younger active patients should be
surgically repaired.
Nonsurgical treatment might be considered for the aging adult who has an inactive lifestyle. This allows the
patient to heal while avoiding the potential complications of surgery. The patient's foot and ankle are placed
in a cast for aprroximately eight weeks. Casting the leg with the foot pointing downward brings the torn
Our Treatment
9

ends of the Achilles tendon together and holds them until scar tissue joins the damaged ends. During this
time, your physiotherapist will instruct you in safe and proper crutch utilization. After your cast is removed,
our physiotherapist can have your fitted with a large heel lift to wear for apprximately another six to eight
weeks after the cast is taken off.
Post-surgical Rehabilitation
Although the time required for recovery is different for each individual, patients are typically placed in a
cast, brace or splint for six to eight weeks after surgery to protect the repair and the skin incision. Your
physiotherapist will help you learn to properly use crutches to keep from putting weight onto your foot too
soon after surgery.
Devices used to immobilize the leg can cause joint stiffness, muscle wasting (atrophy), and blood clots. To
avoid these problems, our therapist will have you start doing motion exercises very soon after surgery.
Patients typically wear a splint or brace that can easily be removed to do the exercises throughout the day.
In this early-motion approach, you begin our physiotherapy program within the first few days after surgery.
Your physiotherapist in Banff may initially use ice, massage, and whirlpool treatments to limit (but not
completely prevent) swelling and pain. Massage and ultrasound help heal and strengthen the tendon.
Our physiotherapy treatments eventually progress to include more advanced mobility and strengthening
exercises, some of which may be done in a pool. The buoyancy of the water helps people walk and exercise
safely without putting too much tension on the healing tendon. The splint is worn while walking usually for
six to eight weeks after surgery.
As your symptoms ease and your strength improves, our physiotherapist will guide you through advancing
stages of exercise. Athletes often begin running, cutting, and jumping drills by the fourth month after
surgery, and although recovery time is different for each paitent, are usually able to get back to their sport
by six full months after surgery.
Our goal is to help you keep your pain and swelling under control, improve your range of motion and
strength, and ensure you regain a normal walking pattern. When your recovery is well under way, regular
visits to the Active Motion Physiotherapy will end. Although we will continue to be a resource, you will be
in charge of doing your exercises as part of an ongoing home program.
Active Motion Physiotherapy provides services for physiotherapy in Banff.
Surgery
Surgical treatment for Achilles tendonitis is not usually necessary for most patients. Surgery options range
from a tenotomy (a simple release of the tendon) to a more involved, open approach of repair.
In some cases of persistent tendonitis and tendonosis a procedure called debridement of the Achilles tendon
may be suggested to help treat the problem.
This procedure is usually done through an incision on the back of the ankle near the Achilles tendon. The
tendon is identified, and any inflamed paratenon tissue (the covering of the tendon) is removed. The tendon
is then split, and the degenerative portion of the tendon is removed. The split tendon is then repaired and
allowed to heal. It is unclear why, but removing the degenerative portion of the tendon seems to stimulate
repair of the tendon to a more normal state.
Surgery
10

Surgery may also be suggested if you have a ruptured Achilles tendon. Reattaching the two ends of the
tendon repairs the torn Achilles tendon. This procedure is usually done through an incision on the back of
the ankle near the Achilles tendon. Numerous procedures have been developed to repair the tendon, but
most involve sewing the two ends of the tendon together in some fashion. Some repair techniques have been
developed to minimize the size of the incision.
In the past, the complications of surgical repair of the Achilles tendon made surgeons think twice before
suggesting surgery. The complications arose because the skin where the incision must be made is thin and
has a poor blood supply. This can lead to an increase in the chance of the wound not healing and infection
setting in. Now that this is better recognized, the complication rate is lower and surgery is recommended
more often.
Portions of this document copyright MMG, LLC.
Surgery
11
