Elbow Anatomy
Introduction
Physiotherapy in Banff for Elbow
Welcome to Active Motion Physiotherapy's patient resource about Elbow problems.
At first, the elbow seems like a simple hinge. But when the complexity of the interaction of the elbow with
the forearm and wrist is understood, it is easy to see why the elbow can cause problems when it does not
function correctly. Part of what makes us human is the way we are able to use our hands. Effective use of
our hands requires stable, painless elbow joints.
This guide will help you understand:
what parts make up the elbow
• 
how those parts work together
• 
Important Structures
Physiotherapy in Banff for Elbow
1

The important structures of the elbow can
be divided into several categories. These include:
bones and joints
• 
ligaments and tendons
• 
muscles
• 
nerves
• 
blood vessels
• 
Bones and Joints
The bones of the elbow  are the humerus (the upper arm bone), the ulna (the larger bone of the forearm, on
the opposite side of the thumb), and the radius (the smaller bone of the forearm on the same side as the
thumb). The elbow itself is essentially a hinge joint, meaning it bends and straightens like a hinge. But there
is a second joint where the end of the radius (the radial head) meets the humerus. This joint is complicated
because the radius has to rotate so that you can turn your hand palm up and palm down. At the same time, it
has to slide against the end of the humerus as the elbow bends and straightens. The joint is even more
complex because the radius has to slide against the ulna as it rotates the wrist as well. As a result, the end of
the radius at the elbow is shaped like a smooth knob with a cup at the end to fit on the end of the humerus.
The edges are also smooth where it glides against the ulna.
Radial Head
Important Structures
2

Articular cartilage is the material that covers the ends of the bones of any joint. Articular cartilage can be up
to one-quarter of an inch thick in the large, weight-bearing joints. It is a bit thinner in joints such as the
elbow, which don't support weight. Articular cartilage is white, shiny, and has a rubbery consistency. It is
slippery, which allows the joint surfaces to slide against one another without causing any damage.
Articular Cartilage
Radial Head
3

The function of articular cartilage is to absorb shock and provide an extremely smooth surface to make
motion easier. We have articular cartilage essentially everywhere that two bony surfaces move against one
another, or articulate. In the elbow, articular cartilage covers the end of the humerus, the end of the radius,
and the end of the ulna.
Ligaments and Tendons
There are several important ligaments in the elbow. Ligaments are soft tissue structures that connect bones
to bones. The ligaments around a joint usually combine together to form a joint capsule. A joint capsule is a
watertight sac that surrounds a joint and contains lubricating fluid called synovial fluid.
In the elbow, two of the most important ligaments are the medial collateral ligament and the lateral
collateral ligament. The medial collateral is on the inside edge of the elbow, and the lateral collateral is on
the outside edge. Together these two ligaments connect the humerus to the ulna and keep it tightly in place
as it slides through the groove at the end of the humerus. These ligaments are the main source of stability for
the elbow. They can be torn when there is an injury or dislocation to the elbow. If they do not heal correctly
the elbow can be too loose, or unstable.
Medial Collateral Ligament
Articular Cartilage
4

Lateral Collateral Ligament
There is also an important ligament called the annular ligament that wraps around the radial head and holds
it tight against the ulna. The word annular means ring shaped, and the annular ligament forms a ring around
Medial Collateral Ligament
5

the radial head as it holds it in place. This ligament can be torn when the entire elbow or just the radial head
is dislocated.
Annular Ligament
There are several important tendons around the elbow. The biceps tendon attaches the large biceps muscle
on the front of the arm to the radius. It allows the elbow to bend with force. You can feel this tendon
crossing the front crease of the elbow when you tighten the biceps muscle.
Lateral Collateral Ligament
6

The triceps tendon connects the large triceps muscle on the back of the arm with the ulna. It allows the
elbow to straighten with force, such as when you perform a push-up.
Triceps Tendon
Annular Ligament
7

The muscles of the forearm cross the elbow and attach to the humerus. The outside, or lateral, bump just
above the elbow is called the lateral epicondyle. Most of the muscles that straighten the fingers and wrist all
come together in one tendon to attach in this area. The inside, or medial, bump just above the elbow is
called the medial epicondyle. Most of the muscles that bend the fingers and wrist all come together in one
tendon to attach in this area. These two tendons are important to understand because they are a common
location of tendonitis.
Lateral Epicondyle
Triceps Tendon
8

Medial Epicondyle
Muscles
The main muscles that are important at the elbow have been mentioned above in the discussion about
tendons. They are the biceps, the triceps, the wrist extensors (attaching to the lateral epicondyle) and the
wrist flexors (attaching to the medial epicondyle).
Medial Epicondyle
9

Nerves
All of the nerves that travel down the arm pass across the elbow. Three main nerves begin together at the
shoulder: the radial nerve, the ulnar nerve, and the median nerve. These nerves carry signals from the brain
to the muscles that move the arm. The nerves also carry signals back to the brain about sensations such as
touch, pain, and temperature.
Nerves that Pass Across the Elbow
Nerves that Pass Across the Elbow
10

Some of the more common problems around the elbow are problems of the nerves. Each nerve travels
through its own tunnel as it crosses the elbow. Because the elbow must bend a great deal, the nerves must
bend as well. Constant bending and straightening can lead to irritation or pressure on the nerves within their
Nerves that Pass Across the Elbow
11

tunnels and cause problems such as pain, numbness, and weakness in the arm and hand.
Blood Vessels
Traveling along with the nerves are the large vessels that supply the arm with blood. The largest artery is the
brachial artery that travels across the front crease of the elbow. If you place your hand in the bend of your
elbow, you may be able to feel the pulsing of this large artery. The brachial artery splits into two branches
just below the elbow: the ulnar artery and the radial artery that continue into the hand. Damage to the
brachial artery can be very serious because it is the only blood supply to the hand.
Brachial Artery
Brachial Artery Splitting into Two Branches
Brachial Artery
12

Summary
As you can see, the elbow is more than a simple hinge. It is designed to provide maximum stability as we
position our forearm to use our hand. When you realize all the different ways we use our hands every day
and all the different positions we put our hands in, it is easy to understand how hard daily life can be when
the elbow doesn't work well.
Portions of this document copyright MMG, LLC.
Brachial Artery Splitting into Two Branches
13
